

It is three months today after Sri Lanka made bad news the world over — the brutal massacre of 268 innocent men, women and children on Easter Sunday, April 21.

About 500 were injured, some of them carrying permanent wounds that are a ghastly reminder of the terror inflicted on them by Islamic State (IS)-influenced Muslim extremists.

That such horror and mayhem came after the armed forces and the Police, trained and modernised at taxpayer’s expense, militarily defeated Tiger guerrillas in May 2009 is well known. With more sophisticated intelligence apparatuses, the security forces not only won acclaim but also drew the admiration of their counterparts worldwide. They wanted to learn from the Sri Lankan expertise. To achieve that fame and great fortitude, thousands in their ranks paid the supreme sacrifice. Many more thousands were injured. The nation sees some of them, at least once a year, as they parade in wheel chairs on Independence Day.

Such a military machine, efficient enough to cope with any internal threat, was allowed to slowly wither since the Yahapalanaya government took office in January 2015.  As repeatedly pointed out in these columns, this has been the result of a colossal mistake of foisting inexperienced persons with little or no knowledge in defence or military matters as Defence Secretaries. President Maithripala Sirisena, who remains the Minister of Defence (in terms of the Constitution) has seen through four different persons – B.M.U.D Basnayake, (recommended by former President Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga), Karunasena Hettiaratchchi (a classmate of President Sirisena), Kapila Waidyaratne (who retired from the Attorney General’s Department) and Hemasiri Fernando (who lobbied and successfully obtained the post). Former Army Commander Shantha Kottegoda is now serving as the fifth after at least two others declined to take the post.

It is no different in the Police. Till October, last year, they have come under the Law and Order Ministry. It was first held by Minister Sagala Ratnayake and later switched hands to Minister Ranjit Madduma Bandara. There was a marked shift in their focus after Police Chief Pujith Jayasundera took over. He had survived many a controversy when he was Deputy Inspector General of Police (DIG). One in particular was an inquiry into how he allegedly ordered personnel in the Kattankudy police station (Eastern Province) to remain kneeling as punishment: All because a sergeant had been arrested days earlier for bribery.

Most United National Front (UNF) leaders favoured him as Police Chief because his nearest rival was DIG S.M. Wickremesinghe, who was head of the Presidential Security Division (PSD) when Mahinda Rajapaksa was in office. In an unprecedented move he continued in the same post when President Sirisena took over. Rajapaksa, to whom it came as a shock, told Agence France Presse news agency’s Amal Jayasinghe in an interview after the presidential polls that he did not know that there was a “spy” deep within his system. Banners sprung up in the City of Colombo welcoming Jayasundera after he was appointed.  There was more luck when the 19th Amendment to the Constitution took effect in May 2015. His removal from office necessitated an impeachment in Parliament, a lengthy procedure.


With questions being asked as to whether politicians are doing the work of the police, the suspended Police Chief Pujith Jayasundera is seen testifying before the Parliamentary Select Committee probing the alleged inaction which led to the Easter Sunday massacres.

The aftermath of a turbo-charged campaign against bribery and corruption during both presidential and parliamentary elections, came under his purview. There was politics in the handling of such cases. Heavy pressure was brought to bear by interested parties through UNF politicians. Complaints over this surfaced during Cabinet meetings. Even without elaborate details, one could easily say that this is the main reason why no important cases saw the light of day. Crime including murder was on the rise to newer levels with a deterioration of the law and order situation. It was only lowered in media statements from the Police.

Most people had to look for a “political pull” before they entered police stations. It is only in the recent weeks, at least some of the lesser known high-profile cases are surfacing. The suspended Police Chief’s alleged leanings with the UNF leadership soured his relations incrementally with President Sirisena. It reached a peak when Jayasundera was not invited for National Security Council (NSC) meetings. When the matter surfaced, President Sirisena publicly laughed it off saying Jayasundera was busier with his mobile phone at such meetings. Surely, if that was the case, he could easily have admonished him. It appeared more a case of not wanting to share “secrets” at the NSC with the country’s top most “peace officer” who is legally tasked to enforce law and order.

Thus, the state of the armed forces and the Police in the past four and half years and how they functioned after the April 21 incidents remained without much direction. Yet, the rapid response of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force helped in great measure to prevent a spiral of ethnic violence. Furthermore, the Sri Lanka Army took it upon itself to hold events in Muslim areas, surrounded by Sinhala villages, to lessen tension and lower a growing fear psychosis. The Army took this upon itself when political leaders failed in this task, perhaps for fear of losing their votes at a poll. It can also be said of the Police to a relatively lesser degree though their inaction led to some sporadic incidents. Yet, the fallout arising from the Easter Sunday massacres continues with some disturbing shadow wars to eliminate one or the other from trade and business sectors. The stoic silence of political leaders in power has been like avtur or jet fuel to this disturbing issue.

The Sunday Times investigation

It is in this shadowy backdrop that an investigation by the Sunday Times revealed some disturbing aspects on the Easter Sunday massacres. The Police, particularly the Criminal Investigation Department (CID), knew the identities of the IS-backed Muslim extremists and preparations for attacks even weeks before they were alerted by the Indian intelligence agency. Only the date of an attack was not known. Neither did the Indian warning mention it. Also aware was the State Intelligence Service (SIS), the premier intelligence agency in the country.

This is by no means to devalue or dismiss the Indian agency’s warning. That helped the public to learn that there were indeed warnings from neighbouring India, something that shook the conscience of the world and exposed inaction at various levels of the government. Otherwise, the issue would not have been highlighted. As a result, what both the CID and the SIS knew would have remained buried in files. Hence, the Indian warning opened the eyes of a nation and the outside world. The Sunday Times is able to reveal today that even before this warning, the Police were well aware of the ominous signs of an attack.

This is perhaps why, after three months of probes by two different arms of the same government, no one is yet to be identified or indicted in courts. One arm is the Police which come under President Sirisena.  Their principal investigative agency, the Criminal Investigation Department (CID), is conducting a detailed probe after the incidents. The other is a Parliamentary Select Committee (PSC) spearheaded by Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe’s UNF MPs. Also backing them are MPs from the Tamil National Alliance (TNA) and the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP).

First to the warning from the Indian intelligence agency dated April 8, 2019, just 13 days before the attacks:

“As per an input, Sri Lanka based Zahran Hashmi (sic) of National Towheed Jamaat and his associates are planning to carry out suicide terror attack in Sri Lanka shortly. They are planning to target some important churches. It is further learnt that they have conducted reconnaissance of the Indian High Commission Sri Lanka and it is one of the targets for the planned attack.

“2   The input indicates that the terrorists may adopt any of the following modes of attack.

a.        Suicide attack

b.        Weapon attack

c.        Knife attack

d.        Truck attack

“3 It is also learnt that the following are the likely team members of the planned terror attack.

i.         Zahran Hashmi

ii.       Jal Al Quithal

iii.      Rilwan

iv.       Sajid Moulavi

v.        Shahid

vi.       Milhan and others

“4.       The input may kindly be enquired into on priority and a feedback given to us.”

Why such a timely intelligence warning was not acted upon so the incidents on Easter Sunday could have been prevented is being gone into by both government probes. Acting on the Indian warning, it was on April 9 that the Director of the State Intelligence Service (SIS) DIG Nilantha Jayawardena intimated to suspended Police Chief Jayasundera a report informing him of the warning. This report, a copy of which has been seen by the Sunday Times said, that the SIS had identified four persons from the six names listed by Indian intelligence. They were Zahran Hashim, Rilwan, Sajid Moulavi and Milhan. This was after a group of Muslim extremists caused damage to Buddha statues in Mawanella on November 20 last year. This was proof that the SIS was aware of the identities.

The report said Zahran Hashim had left the area for Akkaraipattu and was known to be hiding there in an unknown location. Rilwan, his younger brother, who had functioned as a recruiter, had also been hiding. He had quarrelled with a breakaway group. There had been reports of him frequenting Akkaraipattu, Kuliyapitiya, Puttalam, Mawanella and Thihariya. There was information that they had been hiding in Oluvil. During nights, there was information that he had been living in a house in Ariyampattu with his wife and child. Milhan, the report said, was preaching Zahran’s ideology through a website.

The report said this website had been shut down after the attacks on two mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand on March 15, 2019 by a white supremacist. The report said Milhan was educated at Zahira College, Kalmunai. It also named a few others. However, in an unexplained observation, the report claimed that there was no independent evidence to corroborate the Indian intelligence agency’s warning. It did not say whether the matter was being pursued or not. Should not there have been an investigation to probe deeper in to the matter? Ironic enough, it appears that the warnings have not been taken seriously enough. That explains the observation that there was no evidence to corroborate.

By then, the CID’s Special Investigation Unit II under the charge of Inspector Janaka Marasinghe had taken over from the local Police detailed investigations into “causing damage to a Buddha statue in Mawanella with the intention of creating unrest among ethnic groups in an organized manner and possession of explosives and firearms.” It was on a complaint made on December 26 last year by A.M. Senarath Bandara of Lindula, Pahalawatta in Kadugannawa. Eleven Muslim youths, suspected to be IS extremists, were in remand custody by then. Either the SIS was aware or did not take cognisance of this.

Startling finds

This Unit II made some startling discoveries. Three men listed in the Indian intelligence warning spearheaded the attacks on Buddha statutes. In a report to the Mawanella Magistrate Mahinda Liyanagamage on March 27, 2019, Inspector Marasinghe gave their names – Mohammadu Cassim Mohammadu Rilvan (NIC No: 90343264 V), Mohamed Ramiz Mohamed Sajid (NIC No: 922901414 V) and Gayathu Mohammadu Ahamed Milhan ((NIC No: 892003629 V). It is thus clear that the names were known almost five weeks before the attacks. There were 20 other names in the report. Magistrate Liyanagamage gave an order to check these suspects’ bank accounts from January 1, 2018. He also ordered that their mobile phones be checked to identify whom they were in touch.

Another startling find by the Unit II, the result of a confession from the suspects, was the discovery of the operational base of the extremists on January 16 this year in Vanathavillu area of the Puttalam District. Detectives of Unit II conducted a search on two houses located in a coconut estate at Lactoswatte. It is situated on the 8th Milepost, Karandipuval of Vanathavillu.

Two main suspects, the CID said in a report, escaped from the location. Their  report said, the duo had “very systematically collected the explosives and the firearms at this location. It was also revealed that there were plans to store chemicals, produce bombs and maintain a training camp to carry out illegal activities.” A catalogue of the items found by Unit II gives the products required for manufacture of bombs and explosives. They have now been examined by the Government Analyst. A more disturbing discovery was the empty barrels that fuelled suspicions, together with other information, that the bombs for use on Easter Sunday massacres were made here and transported to other locations.

Among the items found – six plastic cans with a label that it contains 35 kilogrammes of Nitric Acid, three barrels with suspected white explosive materials, a box containing 99 detonators bearing label “Made in India” (usually smuggled across the Palk Strait for use in metal quarries), double wire rolls, an air rifle with 422 rounds of ammunition and maps. There were also 50 kilograms of urea (used for manufacture of bombs), two shot guns and cartridges. The find led to representatives from different intelligence agencies and the Government Analyst visiting the operational base. Among them, the Sunday Times learnt, were Lt. Col. Ajantha Karunaratne, head of a unit in the Military Intelligence Corps and ASP  M.A.S.  Mallawaratchchi, responsible for investigations at the State Intelligence Service (SIS).
Even to the most uninitiated, it would be clear from the conduct of the operational base in Vanathavillu, that this was a suspicious exercise posing threats to national security. It was discovered on January 16 this year. The simple question is whether there was any prognosis of what portended. By then, a clear pattern was emerging but no one thought it fit to put their heads together to formulate countermeasures. Thus, the role of Unit II was expanded only after the incidents occurred on April 21. Besides the lives lost and those injured, it is still difficult to estimate the colossal damage to the country’s economy. One example is how empty the star class hotels are both in the City and outstations. Ironic enough, a more intense CID investigation (other than by Unit II) began only after the damage was done on Easter Sunday.
In Vanathavillu, detectives were compelled to carry out another search at the operational base. It came on the confession of a suspect who said some weapons lay buried in a spot within the estate. A search revealed there were two pistols and a T-56 assault rifle concealed in a barrel and buried. These two pistols, it turned out, were the ones seized from two Police Constables killed on November 30 last year in Vavunativu near Batticaloa. They were constables Ganesh Dinesh (28) from Kalmunai and
Niroshan Indika Prasanna (38) from Galle — the first victims of IS-backed Muslim extremists. Does not that show that preparations were under way? It was earlier suspected to be the work of remnants of Tiger guerrillas or so did Police believe.
Arrest of four suspects
This is the juncture at which matters appear to have taken a rather puzzling if not murky turn. The CID Special Investigation Unit II arrested four persons – Abu Haniffa Mohamed Mufiz, 3rd Lane, Mannar Road, Puttalam; Amir Hamza Mohamed Hamaz, 1st Lane, Spill Road, Puttalam; Mohamed Nafiz Mohamed Nafid, 11th Cross Street, Mannar Road, Puttalam and Mohamed Nafiz Mohamed Naveeth, 11th Cross Street, Puttalam. Two were later released amidst allegations that there was political interference. Magistrate Liyanagamage directed the Controller General of Immigration to stop them from leaving Sri Lanka. Such an order is customarily recorded in the SIS data base and accessible through their computers from the Bandaranaike International Airport (BIA) by their operatives there.
These four persons had to be detained under the Prevention of Terrorism Act for a longer period in the light of the find of explosives and firearms with plans to engage in terrorism. A 90-day Detention Order, which the CID sought, could only be signed by the President, who is the Minister of Defence. For this purpose, the CID had to submit a detailed report which dealt with the origins of terrorist activity — the attacks on the Buddha statues, the discovery of the operational base, the suspected aims and objectives of those responsible..
This is to satisfy the President, in keeping with the law, that there in fact is a justifiable case for the detention of the foursome under the PTA and the assessment of the CID on what grounds they were probing. President Sirisena cannot be expected to read every report that comes before him and there is sometimes a possibility some matters may miss his attention. However, the question arises is whether his advisors or officials did not alert him to the reality that a disaster was waiting to happen? Leave alone those at the highest levels, even a high school student would have discerned that there was catastrophe in the making. How come a pivotal agency like the Criminal Investigation Department (CID) did not foresee such a scenario though they spelt it out in a report to President? It is only after the massacres that they became active. That leaves the question of who probes those who probe? Investigations revealed that the foursome arrested had used stolen or other persons’ (without their knowledge) National Identity Cards to obtain mobile phone connections.
During their investigations, Unit II sleuths were closing in on Zahran, described as the leader of the ISIS backed group. They sought a court order on January 30 2019 to prevent him from leaving the country. Here are the details provided to Court:
Mohamed Cassim Zahran (NIC No 862014685). Address: Kudaikaran Lane, Mohamed Mosque Road, Kattankudy 03. Zahran held Passport No: N 2017422. The Court also gave permission for Unit II to contact the Chief Executive Officer of the Facebook in California to obtain details of Zahran’s Facebook accounts. It has now come to light that Zahran had remained in Sri Lanka, secretly moving from place to place, until the attacks on April 21. The CID, once a highly efficient outfit, has not been able to track him down.
As the investigations continued, the Police spokesperson was quick to run to the media even when an ornamental cutlass or even a carving knife is found during a search. It is to former Defence Secretary Gotabaya Rajapaksa’s credit, the media has become dependent very largely on such a spokesperson. The days when a crime or police round was an essential element in a news desk is forgotten. As a result, the news agenda is very often dictated by one Police officer with his photographs on television and print media. The CID, however, has remained secretive to the point of being inimical to the public interest and the country’s stability. Even what should be known is not told. True, the CID is also a victim of heavy political pressure but its operations have now turned to freemason style, cloaked in anonymity and secrecy — so much so it does not seem to be knowing what it is doing.
One example is how the Mawanella Police were thrust to investigate the attacks on the Buddha statues last year. Chamika Wickremesinghe, Superintendent of Police (Kegalle Division) wrote on December 28 last year to Shani Abeysekera, Senior Superintendent of Police and Director of the CID. Listing out the incidents in Kegalle Division, and naming seven suspects in custody, he said, “According to further investigations carried out it appears that an international organisation is trying to create disharmony among different communities. Therefore, take necessary steps to clarify from the International Police (Interpol) about the accuracy of the information.”
SSP Abeysekera, a respected officer, replied: “We are not in a position to obtain the support of the International Police (Interpol) as your message does not refer to a specific country, specific person and the manner of the international conspiracy.” Although Abeysekera may have meant well, questions do arise over his response. The SSP’s knowledge was restricted to his own division and he did not know how to get about; nor did his men have much expertise. Could it not have been possible for one of the CID officers, who are better equipped and knowledgeable, to have met up with the local police and assessed how the matter could have been probed further? Could it not have elicited information that would have been most helpful to prevent the attacks on Easter Sunday? These factors highlight the need for changes at the different units. Sometimes, extension of service is given to higher-ups who reach retirement age at the CID and they tend to or are forced to compromise not only their position but the efficiency of the premier organisation.
The tragic irony in all this is the compartmentalised functioning of different arms of the Police. A glaring example to confirm this issue is over the leader of the IS backed group Zahran. If the Unit II had sought a Court order in January to prevent him leaving Sri Lanka, there was something more. On July 2, 2018 the Terrorism Investigation Division (TID) obtained an open warrant for his arrest before the Colombo Magistrate. The TID had said Zahran was using the internet to spread disaffection and pursued terrorist activities. Little wonder, the local Sherlock Holmes have become tardy, to say the least, whilst parliamentarians have become investigators, too. Perhaps nowhere in the world do such things happen whilst the perpetrators are yet at large. But this is Sri Lanka, a country like no other.
President drops move to seek SC ruling on PC poll
President Maithripala Sirisena will not go ahead and seek a Supreme Court determination for the conduct of Provincial Council elections ahead of the presidential election scheduled for this year.As revealed exclusively in the Sunday Times, he was to move the SC for a determination on the legal issues involved in the conduct of a PC poll. It was over a question of Parliament rejecting last year a Delimitation Commission report on the carving out of newer areas for the Provincial Councils. This came after Parliament passed new laws to put off PC elections. Among those voting for the rejection was the then Provincial Councils Minister, Faiszer Musthapha himself.
The determination was to ascertain whether the rejection was mandatory or declaratory in law. He had sought to ascertain whether PC elections could be conducted on the previous electoral register without a fresh delimitation.
President Sirisena’s proposal cast serious doubts in the legal fraternity. Some viewed it as a move to challenge an action of the legislature, an aspect over which Sirisena was locked in battle with the United National Front (UNF) since October last year. He ousted Ranil Wickremesinghe from the post of Prime Minister and foisted Mahinda Rajapaksa in his place. He also later dissolved Parliament — a move which the Supreme Court declared as unconstitutional.
His latest proposal brought forth a mixed reaction. His own Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) held a different view. Its General Secretary Dayasiri Jayasekera told a hurriedly convened news conference at the party’s headquarters on Wednesday, “We as SLFP members are calling for the Provincial Council elections. We are requesting to have the PC as soon as possible. Some are saying that a PC election cannot be held before the presidential election, but we want it.”
Jayasekera said President Sirisena should not seek a Supreme Court determination in this regard. Instead, he should submit the rejected report in Parliament and obtain approval. That is no easy task. The SLFP would still need a majority vote in Parliament to obtain such approval. Even the Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP), which has now emerged as a major player, is not enthusiastic about an early PC poll. Its official position is that when it wins the presidential election, it would amend PC laws and conduct these polls.
Other SLPP sources are sceptical over different issues. Some fear violence at a PC poll would give President Sirisena the handle to delay the presidential election. Others say it would cause difficulties for them in fund raising since they cannot do so for two elections within a span of two months. A third reason is the selection of candidates. This could displease non recipients at a time when they need to keep their rank and file together.
President Sirisena’s move to seek a determination followed a letter sent to him by National Election Commission (NEC) Chairman Mahinda Deshapriya. In that, he said it was possible for him to hold the PC polls first and the presidential election later this year. Deshapriya also told a delegation of the Editors’ Guild of Sri Lanka during a meeting this Monday that the two polls were possible this year.
Deshapriya gave a presentation in Parliament this week for political party leaders on a pilot project he proposed to launch during PC polls. This was the introduction of an Electronic Voting System using a voter’s passport or National Identity Card where there was electronic identification. This was to be tested with the usual ballot boxes and polling booths as before. An advantageous feature of the proposed system, Deshapriya said, was the short time taken to announce results.
Despite some reservations on the PC polls, talks between the SLPP and the SLFP are moving forward. During informal contacts this week, UPFA General Secretary Mahinda Ameraweera told SLPP leader G.L. Peiris that they should conclude their discussions within the next three weeks. Talks centre on a draft constitution which the SLFP senior deputy leader Nimal Siripala de Silva handed over to Dr Peiris. It has since been improved upon and returned. The SLFP’s formal response is now being awaited.
This move, as reported earlier, will not mean that President Sirisena has any prospect of becoming the joint candidate of the proposed alliance. It only adds credence to reports that he will not contest a second term. Whilst the SLFP – SLPP talks are under way, behind-the-scenes there were other developments, too. There were SLFP parliamentarians who are having backchannel talks to join the SLPP. This is whilst at least two SLFP MPs are set to join the United National Party (UNP).
These developments notwithstanding, the architect of the SLPP, Basil Rajapaksa, has begun a series of meetings with registered political parties which are not represented in Parliament. They are particularly those from the Northern and Eastern provinces. The idea is to persuade them to join the proposed alliance and also to obtain their view on matters relating to the common alliance policy.